11.04/src/README.md, before:

# Trees, Recursion, and the Stack

## Previously, on CSC 143

**Linked Lists** are list structures composed of individual **nodes** that each store a payload value, and a reference to the next node.

```
class ListNode<T> {
  T payload;
  ListNode<T> next;

  ListNode(T payload) {
    this.payload = payload;
  }
}
```

A series of `ListNode`s daisy-chained together forms a *data structure* that stores an arbitrary number of elements.

```
ListNode<T> head = new ListNode<>(0);

head.next = new ListNode<>(1);
head.next.next = new ListNode<>(2);

// [0, 1, 2]
```

Reaching the `i`th element requires "walking" the list.

```
public static T get(int i) {
  ListNode<T> temp = head;
  for (int j = 0; j < i; j++) {
    temp = temp.next;
  }

  return temp.payload;
}
```

## Trees

Linked List nodes are, by nature, limited to a single *next element.* This is what makes the Linked List a sequentially *ordered collection*, actually, the `List<T>` interface in Java.

See: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/List.html

If we allow nodes to have *multiple successors*, or **children**, the resulting structure is a **Tree**.

**Whiteboard:** Linked List, Binary Tree

Some definitions:

 - Trees have a head node, called the **root**, much like Linked Lists.
 
 - Each node *can* have **child** nodes. For binary trees, each node can have *up to* two children.
 
 - Nodes that do not have children are called **leaves**, or leaf nodes.

Some observations:

 - Trees nodes are not sequential, and have no natural sense of order.
 
 - As a result, trees do not support indexing. How else can we identify nodes?

 - Trees are naturally `O(???)`, where `b` is the **branching factor** (max children per node) and `d` is the depth.

 - Linked Lists are trees, with a **branching factor** of one.

 - Trees cannot have cycles. What about linked lists?
 
 - Trees can be "unbalanced". What are the consequences?

**See:** BinaryTreeNode.java

### Tree Construction

Constructing a tree is similar to constructing a Linked List: construct nodes and attach them to each other using references.

**See:** BinaryTreeTest.java

Looking up an individual node to a tree requires "walking" the path to the node.

For a binary tree with `n` nodes, the Big O of lookup, given a path, is `O(???)` for a balanced binary tree.

Not every tree is a binary tree! The two-child limit is artificially imposed; 
we can TreeNode class where each node has limitless children.

**See:** TreeNode.java

### Tree Search

Searching a Linked List is easy: walk the list, look for the target value.

**See:** LinkedListTest.java

Searching a tree for a target value is much harder: we no longer have a linear path to walk down.

```
public <T> boolean contains(BinaryTreeNode<T> root, T value) {
  while (root != null) {
    if (root.payload.equals(value))
      return true;

    // ??? Do we look left or right ???
    // ??? If we pick the wrong direction, how do we back up ???
  }
}
```

Searching is closely related to several problems that require traversing *all* nodes in the tree:

 - How many nodes are in the tree?
 - What are all the leaf nodes in the tree?
 - What's the maximum value stored in the tree?
 ...

Iteration won't work here. We need a new strategy.

### Recursion

**Recursion** is a strategy for solving problems by finding a solution based on smaller instances of the same problem.

Recursion involves two big ideas:

 - The **base case**, the simplest subproblem, where the solution is trivial.

   e.g. determining if a value exists in a Linked List, that only contains only a single node. (Easy!)

 - The **recursive case**, where a solution to a complex problem is derived from a simpler subproblem.
 
   e.g. determining if a value exists in a Linked List at the present head node,
        then determining if the value exists on the rest of the list (the simpler subproblem)

#### Writing Recursive Algorithms

Writing recursive algorithms follows the same process.

 1. Write a condition that covers the base case.
    This will return *exactly* the solution to the base case.

 2. Write the recursive case that:
    This will return a *combination* of recursive calls to subproblem(s).

See: RecursionTest.java

Commit message:

Finish 11.04 notes on trees and recursion

11.04/src/README.md, after:

# Trees, Recursion, and the Stack

## Previously, on CSC 143

**Linked Lists** are list structures composed of individual **nodes** that each store a payload value, and a reference to the next node.

```
class ListNode<T> {
  T payload;
  ListNode<T> next;

  ListNode(T payload) {
    this.payload = payload;
  }
}
```

A series of `ListNode`s daisy-chained together forms a *data structure* that stores an arbitrary number of elements.

```
ListNode<T> head = new ListNode<>(0);

head.next = new ListNode<>(1);
head.next.next = new ListNode<>(2);

// [0, 1, 2]
```

Reaching the `i`th element requires "walking" the list.

```
public static T get(int i) {
  ListNode<T> temp = head;
  for (int j = 0; j < i; j++) {
    temp = temp.next;
  }

  return temp.payload;
}
```

## Trees

Linked List nodes are, by nature, limited to a single *next element.* This is what makes the Linked List a sequentially *ordered collection*, actually, the `List<T>` interface in Java.

See: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/List.html

If we allow nodes to have *multiple successors*, or **children**, the resulting structure is a **Tree**.

**Whiteboard:** Linked List, Binary Tree

Some definitions:

 - Trees have a head node, called the **root**, much like Linked Lists.
 
 - Each node *can* have **child** nodes. For binary trees, each node can have *up to* two children.
 
 - Nodes that do not have children are called **leaves**, or leaf nodes.

Some observations:

 - Trees nodes are not sequential, and have no natural sense of order.
 
 - As a result, trees do not support indexing. How else can we identify nodes?

 - Trees are naturally `O(???)`, where `b` is the **branching factor** (max children per node) and `d` is the depth.

 - Linked Lists are trees, with a **branching factor** of one.

 - Trees cannot have cycles. What about linked lists?
 
 - Trees can be "unbalanced". What are the consequences?

**See:** BinaryTreeNode.java

### Tree Construction

Constructing a tree is similar to constructing a Linked List: construct nodes and attach them to each other using references.

**See:** BinaryTreeTest.java

Looking up an individual node to a tree requires "walking" the path to the node.

For a binary tree with `n` nodes, the Big O of lookup, given a path, is `O(???)` for a balanced binary tree.

Not every tree is a binary tree! The two-child limit is artificially imposed; 
we can TreeNode class where each node has limitless children.

**See:** TreeNode.java

### Tree Search

Searching a Linked List is easy: walk the list, look for the target value.

**See:** LinkedListTest.java

Searching a tree for a target value is much harder: we no longer have a linear path to walk down.

```
public <T> boolean contains(BinaryTreeNode<T> root, T value) {
  while (root != null) {
    if (root.payload.equals(value))
      return true;

    // ??? Do we look left or right ???
    // ??? If we pick the wrong direction, how do we back up ???
  }
}
```

Searching is closely related to several problems that require traversing *all* nodes in the tree:

 - How many nodes are in the tree?
 - What are all the leaf nodes in the tree?
 - What's the maximum value stored in the tree?
 ...

Iteration won't work here. We need a new strategy.

### Recursion

**Recursion** is a strategy for solving problems by finding a solution based on smaller instances of the same problem.

Recursion involves two big ideas:

 - The **base case**, the simplest subproblem, where the solution is trivial.

   e.g. determining if a value exists in a Linked List, that only contains only a single node. (Easy!)

 - The **recursive case**, where a solution to a complex problem is derived from a simpler subproblem.
 
   e.g. determining if a value exists in a Linked List at the present head node,
        then determining if the value exists on the rest of the list (the simpler subproblem)

#### Writing Recursive Algorithms

Writing recursive algorithms follows the same process.

 1. Write a condition that covers the base case.
    This will return *exactly* the solution to the base case.

 2. Write the recursive case that returns a *combination* of recursive calls to subproblem(s).
 
 3. Pray the recursive case works.

**See:** RecursionTest.java

Steps (2) and (3) can be challenging - sometimes the subproblem is not obvious,
and the recursive call can result in an infinite loop!

### Tree Search, Recursive

Trees are naturally recursive: children are trees on their own, but a subset of the overall tree.

With the power of recursion, we can finally write our tree search algorithm.

 1. Base case: the root is null, or contains the value we're looking for.
 
 2. Recursive case: determine if the children subtrees contain the value we're looking for.
 
 3. Pray
